---
layout: post
title: The determinant and the Laplacian
---

The __Determinant__ is a measure of how a linear function scales a vector space. The __Laplacian__ is a measure of how the gradient field is expanding/contracting. They have similar interpretations, yet their equations look vastly different. What is the connection?

## The Determinant

THe most intuitive definition of the determinant (in my opinion) is

$$
\begin{align}
det(f) &= \prod_{i=0}^n \sigma_i \\
\end{align}
$$

<side>SVD decoposition: any matrix $A$ can be decomposed as $A = USV^T$, where $U, V$ are unitary and $S$ is a diagonal matrix.</side>
assuming you are familiar with [SVD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singular-value_decomposition), you will know that the singular values of the SVD decomposition $\sigma_i$ are the scaling factors applied by the transformation $A$. Thus their product tells us how a unit square would change volume as it is scaled.


Relationship to the cross product..
> The cross product u × v can be interpreted as a vector which is perpendicular to both u and v and whose magnitude is equal to the area of the parallelogram determined by the two vectors

## Laplacian

The laplacian of a (continuious fn?) is defined as the divergence of the gradient.

$$
\begin{align}
div(\nabla f) &= \nabla \cdot \nabla f \\
&= \sum_{i=0}^n \frac{\partial^2 f_i}{\partial x_i^2} \\
\end{align}
$$


## Algebra

If they both cappture the same idea, we expect them to have similar properties;

- associativity
- $op(f) = op(f^T), op(f) = op(f^{-1})$
- $op(f \circ g) = op(f) \circ op(g)$
- ...

## Exterior product

> The exterior algebra Λ(V) of a vector space V over a field K is defined as the quotient algebra of the tensor algebra T(V) by the two-sided ideal I generated by all elements of the form x ⊗ x for x ∈ V.

Good.

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf u &= u_1e_1 + u_2e_2 + u_3e_3 \\
\mathbf u &= v_1e_1 + v_2e_2 + v_3e_3 \\
\mathbf u \wedge \mathbf v &= (u_1v_2 - u_2v_1)(e_1 \wedge e_2) + (u_3v_1 - v_3u_1)(e_1 \wedge e_3) + (u_2v_3 - u_3v_2)(e_2 \wedge e_3)\\
\end{align}
$$


## (types of) product

- inner product (similarity)
- outer product (all combinations)
- cross product (?)
- exterior product (?)
- ?? product

how many different types are there?

## Notes

potentially useful?
$$
tr(A) = log(det(exp(A))) \\
$$

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Determinant
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exterior_algebra
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Differential_form
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace_operator
